Tag Lines
Building on Strengths to Overcome challenges for a Bright Future
Transforming lives of each child we serve, one by one.

Questions:

Are we trying to be attractive to:
Parents that will pay for

Message from the President

We recently entered into a new era for our school at the groundbreaking for the new
building. For over eighty years, the Orthogenic School has been located on the University of
Chicago campus, and for over thirteen years, the Hyde Park Day School has shared space with
the Orthogenic School. At the groundbreaking ceremony this month, I observed that historically,
this was the very first time Orthogenic School and Hyde Park Day School parents and children
have gathered in one room at the same time. This event was a remarkably festive and emotional
event, especially after one child from each of the schools spoke to the assembled group. No
person present could have anything other than a visceral reaction to these young peoples’
description of their experience with each of our schools and the dramatic effect that this
experience has had on their lives. In our new facility, we seek to continue having a dramatic
effect on the life trajectory of every single child we serve.

One central quality of a well respected and effective learning institution is that the vision
is concrete and understandable, and everybody is committed to it. As I mentioned in my
comments at the groundbreaking, what we seek to do is not to have a small effect on the lives of
a great number of individuals. There are lots of organizations with such a vision, but we are not
among them. What we seek to do and we know we are good at is have a very dramatic effect on
the lives of the small number of children we serve, one by one. This is true both in the
Orthogenic School and in the Hyde Park Day School: the missions are the same, only the
populations, average ages of students and disabilities are different.

At the Hyde Park Day School, our mission is to intervene much earlier in the life of a
child challenged by a severe learning disability so that he/she does not need the services of a
place like the Orthogenic School. Likewise, for those severely emotionally challenged children
served by the Orthogenic School, many of whom may have begun their elementary careers as
severely LD children who were not properly served, thereby falling into mental illness, we seek
to reverse the effects of the ravages of mental illness on our Orthogenic School students and help
them point their own lives in a totally new direction. In both schools, we do everything we
possibly can, as creatively as it can possibly be done, to make sure our children graduate from
either one of our schools well on the way to becoming enthusiastic and positive learners;
productive members of society; and most importantly, people who have the capacity to be happy
and productive members of our society.

Going forward, we need your help to do this. We need the help of our grateful families
of graduates; our friends in the referral community; and families in foundations whose missions
parallel ours. The Hyde Park Day School is the only LD only school for education of severely
learning disabled children in the state of Illinois. All others, while they might accept children
with learning disabilities, accept other categories of learners as well.

The Orthogenic School is part of a disappearing breed of schools that make use of human
relationships, rather than token economies, to slowly and permanently change a child from a
destructive pattern to a constructive pattern in their lives. The approach is slow, methodical,
and highly precision oriented and involves intervening every minute of the day and night in a
therapeutically supportive way, making creative use of relationships formed within the universe
of the school. There are very, very few facilities left in the world that do this effectively. We

DRAFT

were one of the first and we continue in this orientation while other institutions have been
rapidly giving in to pressures that involve less resources, shorter interventions, and of course an
increased chance that positive change, meticulously nourished, will not be permanent.

I am hopeful that anyone who reads this message, and who is not familiar with our
program will contact either myself or someone at one of the schools to learn more. Our new
visitors always respond in a very positive and visceral way to what we are doing, once they are
able to spend some time with our students.

With warm regards,

Brooke R. Whitted, President
